John Francis Anthony Pastorius III (December 1, 1951 – September 21, 1987), known as Jaco Pastorius /ˈdʒɑːkoʊ pæsˈtɔːriəs/, was an influential American jazz musician, composer, big band leader and electric bass player. He is best known for his work with Weather Report from 1976 to 1981, as well as work with artists including Joni Mitchell, Pat Metheny, and his own solo projects.[1]
As a musician, he developed a highly influential approach to bass playing that combined a deep understanding of advanced harmony with ferocious technical prowess. His signature approach infused Latin-influenced 16th-note funk, lyrical soloing on fretless bass, bass chords and innovative use of harmonics. He was inducted into the Down Beat Jazz Hall of Fame in 1988, one of only seven bassists so honored (and the only electric bass guitarist).

Early life

Pastorius was born December 1, 1951, in Norristown, Pennsylvania,[2] to Jack Pastorius (big band singer and drummer) and Stephanie Katherine Haapala Pastorius,[3] the first of their three children. Jaco´s grandmother was a Finn, named Kaisa Eriika Isojärvi. Jaco Pastorius was of Finnish, Sami,[4] German, Swedish and Irish ancestry.[5] He was a descendant of Francis Daniel Pastorius.[citation needed]
Shortly after his birth, his family moved to Oakland Park, Florida (near Fort Lauderdale). Pastorius went to elementary and middle school at St. Clement's Catholic School in Wilton Manors, and he was an altar boy at the adjoining church.[6]
Pastorius formed his first band named the Sonics (not the Seattle-based band of the same name), along with John Caputo and Dean Noel. He went to high school at Northeast High in Oakland Park, Florida.[7] He was a talented athlete with skills in football, basketball, and baseball, and he picked up music at an early age. He took the name "Anthony" at his confirmation.[7]
He loved baseball and often watched it with his father. Pastorius' nickname was influenced by his love of sports and also by the umpire Jocko Conlan.[7] He changed the spelling from "Jocko" to "Jaco" after the pianist Alex Darqui sent him a note. Darqui, who was French, assumed "Jaco" was the correct spelling. Pastorius liked the new spelling.[7] Jaco Pastorius had a second nickname, given to him by his younger brother Gregory: "Mowgli", after the wild young boy in Rudyard Kipling's children's classic, The Jungle Book. Gregory gave him the nickname in reference to his seemingly endless energy as a child.[7] Pastorius later established his music publishing company as Mowgli Music.

Career

Pastorius started out following in the footsteps of his father Jack, playing the drums until he injured his wrist playing football at age 13. The damage to his wrist was severe enough to warrant corrective surgery and ultimately inhibited his ability to play drums.[7] At the time, he had been playing with a local band, Las Olas Brass. When the band's bass player, David Neubauer, decided to quit the band, Pastorius bought an electric bass guitar from a local pawn shop for US$15.00 and began to learn to play[8][not in citation given] with drummer Rich Franks, becoming the bassist for the band.[9]
By 1968–1969, at the age of 17, Pastorius had begun to appreciate jazz and had saved enough money to buy an upright bass. Its deep, mellow tone appealed to him, though it strained his finances. Pastorius had difficulty maintaining the instrument, which he attributed to the humidity of his Florida home. He woke one day to find that his costly upright bass had cracked. Following this development, he traded it in for a 1960 Fender Jazz Bass.[10]
Pastorius' first real break came when he became bass player for Wayne Cochran and the C.C. Riders. He also played on various local R&B and jazz records during that time, such as with Little Beaver and Ira Sullivan.
In 1973 at the age of 22, Pastorius was teaching bass at the University of Miami. While at UM he made contact with many of the great music students who were going through the program at that time, including Pat Metheny, who enrolled in 1972 but was too advanced a player to remain a student and likewise became part of the UM music faculty at the age of 18.
In 1974, Pastorius began playing with Pat Metheny. They recorded together, first with Paul Bley as leader and Bruce Ditmas on drums, on an album later titled "Jaco," for pianist Paul Bley and Carol Goss' Improvising Artists label (it was Metheny's recording debut), then with drummer Bob Moses on a trio album on the ECM label, entitled Bright Size Life (1976).

Debut album  fa

In 1975, Pastorius was introduced to Blood, Sweat & Tears drummer Bobby Colomby, who had been asked by Columbia Records to find "new talent" for their jazz division.[11] Pastorius' first album, produced by Colomby, was Jaco Pastorius (1976), a breakthrough album for the electric bass.[2] Many consider this the finest bass album ever recorded;[2] it was widely praised by critics. The album also boasted a lineup of heavyweights in the jazz community at the time – including Herbie Hancock, Wayne Shorter, David Sanborn, Lenny White, Hubert Laws, Don Alias, and Michael Brecker. Even the soul singers Sam & Dave reunited to appear on the track "Come On, Come Over".[12]



