Leon Trotsky[a] (/ˈtrɒtski/;[1] Russian: Лев Дави́дович Тро́цкий; pronounced [ˈlʲɛf ˈtrotskʲɪj] ( listen); born Lev Davidovich Bronstein;[b] 7 November [O.S. 26 October] 1879 – 21 August 1940) was a Marxist revolutionary and theorist, Soviet politician, and the founding leader of the Red Army.
Trotsky initially supported the Menshevik Internationalists faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party. He joined the Bolsheviks immediately prior to the 1917 October Revolution, and eventually became a leader within the Communist Party. He was, alongside Lenin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Stalin, Sokolnikov and Bubnov, one of the seven members of the first Politburo, founded in 1917 in order to manage the Bolshevik Revolution.[2] During the early days of the RSFSR and the Soviet Union, he served first as People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and later as the founder and commander of the Red Army with the title of People's Commissar of Military and Naval Affairs. He was a major figure in the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War (1918–1923).
After leading a failed struggle of the Left Opposition against the policies and rise of Joseph Stalin in the 1920s and against the increasing role of bureaucracy in the Soviet Union, Trotsky was removed from power (October 1927), expelled from the Communist Party (November 1927), and finally exiled from the Soviet Union (February 1929). As the head of the Fourth International, Trotsky continued in exile to oppose the Stalinist bureaucracy in the Soviet Union. On Stalin's orders, he was assassinated in Mexico in August 1940 by Ramón Mercader, a Spanish-born Soviet agent.[3]
Trotsky's ideas formed the basis of Trotskyism, a major school of Marxist thought that opposes the theories of Stalinism. He was one of the few Soviet political figures who were not rehabilitated by the government under Nikita Khrushchev in the 1950s. In the late 1980s, his books were released for publication in the Soviet Union.

Childhood and family (1879–1895)

Leon Trotsky was born Lev Davidovich Bronstein on 7 November 1879, in Yanovka or Yanivka, in the Kherson governorate of the Russian Empire (now Bereslavka, in the Ukraine), a small village 24 km (15 miles) from the nearest post office. He was the fifth of eight children of well-to-do farmers, David Leontyevich Bronstein (1847–1922) and his wife Anna Bronstein (1850–1910). The family was of Jewish origin but reportedly not religious.[4] The language they spoke at home was Surzhyk, a mixture of Russian and Ukrainian.[5] Trotsky's younger sister, Olga, who also grew up to be a Bolshevik and a Soviet politician, married the prominent Bolshevik Lev Kamenev.
Much attention has been given by anti-Communists, anti-Semites, and anti-Trotskyists, to Trotsky's original surname, stressing the political and historical significance of the name Bronstein.[6][7] Some authors, notably Robert Service, have also claimed that Trotsky's childhood first name was the Yiddish "Leiba". David North remarks that this is an apparent attempt to emphasize Trotsky's Jewish origins, that contrary to Service's claims there is no documentary evidence to support it, and that it is highly improbable, since the family did not speak Yiddish.[6] Both North and Walter Laqueur in their books say that Trotsky's childhood name was Lyova, a standard Russian diminutive of the name "Lev".[7]
When Trotsky was nine, his father sent him to Odessa to be educated. He was enrolled in a German school, which became Russified during his years in Odessa, as a result of the Imperial government's policy of Russification.[8] As Isaac Deutscher notes in his biography of Trotsky, Odessa was then a bustling cosmopolitan port city, very unlike the typical Russian city of the time. This environment contributed to the development of the young man's international outlook.[9] Although Trotsky stated in his autobiography My Life that he was never perfectly fluent in any language but Russian and Ukrainian, Raymond Molinier wrote that Trotsky spoke French fluently.[10]